CJ server setup  guide (#245)
leaningtech/labs: sites/cheerpj/src/content/docs/11-guides/basic-server-setup.md

---
title: Basic Server Setup
description: How do serve your own Java application with CheerpJ
---

## Overview

> To run your Java applications in the browser, you will need to self host the application files. This guide will cover some simple HTTP servers that can be used for basic testing and will discuss NGINX for more advanced setups, for example when self hosting CheerpJ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run your Java applications in the browser, you will need to host the application files. This guide will cover some simple HTTP servers that can be used for basic testing. We will also discuss NGINX which is useful in more advanced scenarios, for example when self hosting CheerpJ.
```

> [!note] Important

> > The content of this guide is specifically made for testing setups and should not be used for production environments. For production environments, it is essential to utilize HTTPS, since it is more secure than plain HTTP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The content of this guide is specifically made for testing setups and should not be used for production environments. In production environments it is essential to utilize HTTPS, both to improve security and to gain access to advanced Web APIs.
```

## Static "one-line" servers

> One-line HTTP servers are simple tools that can be run directly from the command line with a short command. They are simple to set up and are useful for quickly serving static files or testing web applications locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One-line HTTP servers are simple tools that can be run directly from the terminal with a short command. They are simple to set up and useful for quickly serving static files or testing web applications locally.
```

_One-Line_ servers that have been tested and work with CheerpJ:

- `npx serve`
- `npx http-server`

## CheerpJ HTTP server requirements

### Range requests

> CheerpJ makes use of [Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Range_requests), to download resources in chunks, for example JAR files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpJ makes use of [Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Range_requests) to download resources in chunks, for example JAR files.
```

Thus, the HTTP server hosting the Java application files must support "Range" headers. Some HTTP servers may need additional configuration to enable this feature, while others have native support, and some are not compatible at all. For instance, Python's `http-server` module, commonly used for quick testing, lacks support for range headers and therefore won't work with CheerpJ.

> If your HTTP server does not support `Range Requests`, you will see an error message like this in the browser console:

Reviewer: "Range" requests? For consistency with other sentences

> [!warning] Network error for http://127.0.0.1:8084/exampleApp.jar: HTTP server does not support the 'Range' header. CheerpJ cannot run.

NPM server tools such as `npx serve` and `npx http-server` typically have built-in support for range requests, making them suitable for basic testing without the need for additional configurations. The same applies to NGINX, which will be discussed in more detail later in this guide.

### JavaScript library files

CheerpJ allows you to implement native libraries in JavaScript, more details on this can be found in our [Native Libraries Guide](/docs/guides/implementing-native-librariest).

Depending on the size of the JavaScript library file, you may encounter an error with certain browsers, like Firefox:

> [!warning] Network error for http://localhost:8080/library.js: HTTP server returned compressed partial data. That should not happen. CheerpJ cannot run

> This error occurs because plain JavaScript files are compressed automatically in Firefox, since it provides the `Accept-Encoding: gzip` header for range requests, which is illegal. It is unclear whether the response contains partial compressed data, or compressed partial data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error occurs because plain JavaScript files are compressed automatically in Firefox, since it provides the `Accept-Encoding: gzip` header for range requests. This is not well defined, since it is unclear whether the response contains partial compressed data, or compressed partial data.
```

To resolve this issue, you need to disable compression for range requests or disable compression entirely. To disable compression in `npx serve`, use `npx serve -u`.

By default, `npx http-server` should correctly serve JavaScript library files without compression.

## NGINX Guide

We won't go into detail on how to install and setup NGINX, but will focus on the configuration necessary to integrate NGINX seamlessly with CheerpJ.

### Nginx configuration file

This NGINX configuration template will work with most Java applications and CheerpJ for testing purposes.

```nginx title=nginx.conf
worker_processes  1;
error_log   nginx_main_error.log info;
pid nginx_user.pid;
daemon off;

events {
	worker_connections  1024;
}

http {
	access_log  nginx_access.log;
	error_log   nginx_error.log info;

	default_type  application/octet-stream;

	sendfile        on;

	types {
		text/html html;
		text/css css;

> 		application/javascript js;

Reviewer: Add wasm

	}

	server {
		listen       8080;
		server_name  localhost;

		gzip on;
		gzip_types      application/javascript application/wasm;

		charset utf-8;

		location / {
			# this should point to your root application folder
			root /home/path/to/java/app;

			autoindex on;
			absolute_redirect off;
			index  index.html index.htm;
		}
	}
}
```

Let's take a closer look at some important settings required for CheerpJ and to also ensure proper file serving.

We specify the default MIME type for unspecified files as `application/octet-stream`. We do this to indicate that a file is binary data, instructing the server and client to treat the file as raw bytes instead of interpreting it as text or any other format.

```nginx
default_type  application/octet-stream;
```

Additionally we add a `types` block and define certain MIME types. Like this NGINX identifies the file type for each response and sets the corresponding `Content-Type` header in HTTP responses. This enables browsers and clients to interpret content accurately,

```nginx
types {
	text/html html;
	text/css css;

> 	application/javascript js;

Reviewer: Wasm

---
title: Basic Server Setup
description: How do serve your own Java application with CheerpJ
---

## Overview

To run your Java applications in the browser, you will need to host the application files. This guide will cover some simple HTTP servers that can be used for basic testing. We will also discuss NGINX which is useful in more advanced scenarios, for example when self hosting CheerpJ.

> [!note] Important
> The content of this guide is specifically made for testing setups and should not be used for production environments. In production environments it is essential to utilize HTTPS, both to improve security and to gain access to advanced Web APIs.

> ## Static "one-line" servers

Reviewer: "one-line", One-line _One-Line_ (used in various sentences)

Let's settle on a single style

---
title: Basic Server Setup
description: How do serve your own Java application with CheerpJ
---

## Overview

> To run your Java applications in the browser, you will need to self host the application files. This guide will cover some simple HTTP servers that can be used for basic testing and will discuss NGINX for a more advanced testing setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run your Java applications in the browser, you will need to self host the application files. This guide will cover some simple HTTP servers that can be used for basic testing and will discuss NGINX for more advanced setups.
```

> [!note] Important

> > The content of this guide is specifically made for testing setups and should not be used for a production environments. For production environments, it is essential to utilize HTTPS, for security reasons but also since it allows for a proper cross-origin setup. Localhost does not follow the same CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) policies, making it convenient for testing purposes.

Reviewer: I am not sure about which CORS issues are you thinking about here. Can you elaborate?

## Static "one-line" servers

One-line HTTP servers are simple tools that can be run directly from the command line with a short command. They are simple to set up and are useful for quickly serving static files or testing web applications locally.

"One-Line" servers that have been tested and work with CheerpJ:

- `npx serve`
- `npx http-server`

## CheerpJ HTTP server requirements

### Range requests

> CheerpJ makes use of [Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Range_requests), to download specific resources in chunks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpJ makes use of [Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Range_requests), to download resources in chunks, for example JAR files.
```

Thus, the HTTP server hosting the Java application files must support "Range" headers.

Some HTTP servers may need additional configuration to enable this feature, while others have native support, and some are not compatible at all.

> For instance, Python's `http-server` module, commonly used for quick testing, lacks support for range headers and therefor won't work with CheerpJ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, Python's `http-server` module, commonly used for quick testing, lacks support for range headers and therefore won't work with CheerpJ.
```

If your HTTP server does not support `Range Requests`, you will see an error message like this in the browser console:

> [!warning] Network error for http://127.0.0.1:8084/exampleApp.jar: HTTP server does not support the 'Range' header. CheerpJ cannot run.

NPM server tools such as `npx serve` and `npx http-server` typically have built-in support for range requests, making them suitable for basic testing without the need for additional configurations.

The same applies to NGINX, which will be discussed in more detail later in this guide.

### Compressed JavaScript library files

CheerpJ allows you to implement native libraries in JavaScript, more details on this can be found in our [Native Libraries Guide](/docs/guides/implementing-native-librariest).

> In certain deployment setups, both compressed and uncompressed library files are present in the deployment folder to reduce network latency:

Reviewer: This is overcomplicated and not necessary for problems to arise. Plain JS files are compressed automatically for Firefox since it provides the `Accept-Encoding: gzip` header for range requests, which is illegal.

The reason compression and range request cannot work together is that it's unclear if you get the range in the compressed or uncompressed data.

No pre-compressed .gz data is required for problems to occur

Author: I had different behavior since the js library I loaded was not big enough. I'll update this part.

`npx serve` supports this feature by default, and for `npx http-server`, it can be enabled with `npx http-server -g`.

However, with certain browsers you may encounter issues with CheerpJ when hosting the compressed library files. In rare cases an error can happen since we get a 206 in our network response, indicading partial content, but also with a Content-Encoding header.

You will encounter the following console error in that case:

> [!warning] Network error for http://localhost:8085/example/native.js: HTTP server returned compressed partial data. That should not happen. CheerpJ cannot run.

To resolve this issue, you will need to disable compression for range requests or compression altogether. To disable compression in `npx serve`, use `npx serve -u`; however, this will only serve the original uncompressed .js files.

For properly serving compressed files without the Content-Encoding header, consider utilizing NGINX, which will be discussed further in the next section.

## NGINX Guide

We won't go into detail on how to install and setup NGINX, but will focus on the configuration necessary to integrate NGINX seamlessly with CheerpJ.

> For instructions on installing and setting up NGINX, you can refer to their official [Beginners Guide](https://nginx.org/en/docs/beginners_guide.html).

Reviewer: My feeling is that we should not even attempt to reference NGINX docs, people should look for these things by themselves. I am unsure if this right or not though.

Author: I was also unsure if we want this part or not, it does add a lot of unnecessary text imo. I think it's save to remove it.

Please note that the installation process may vary depending on your operating system. For guidance on installing NGINX on Windows, visit this [documentation](https://nginx.org/en/docs/windows.html) and for other operating systems, refer to [this](https://nginx.org/en/docs/install.html).

### Nginx configuration file

This NGINX configuration template will work with most Java applications and CheerpJ for testing purposes.

> ```nginx

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```nginx title=nginx.conf
```

worker_processes  1;
error_log   nginx_main_error.log info;
pid nginx_user.pid;
daemon off;

events {
	worker_connections  1024;
}

http {
	access_log  nginx_access.log;
	error_log   nginx_error.log info;

	include       /etc/nginx/mime.types;
	default_type  application/octet-stream;

	sendfile        on;

	server {
		listen       8080;
		server_name  localhost;

		gzip on;
		gzip_types      application/javascript application/wasm text/plain;

		charset utf-8;

		location / {
			# this should point to your root application folder
			root /home/path/to/java/app;

			autoindex on;
			absolute_redirect off;
			index  index.html index.htm;

> 			add_header 'Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy' 'same-origin' always;

Reviewer: Not needed for CheerpJ

Author: This was the part of the configuration I tested wrong, that's why I ended up mentioning CORS in the top part of the docs. I'll remove it.

			add_header 'Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy' 'require-corp' always;
			add_header 'Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy' 'credentialless' always;
		}
	}
}
```

Let's take a closer look at some important settings required for CheerpJ and to also ensure proper file serving.

By including NGINX's `mime.types` file, NGINX effectively identifies the file type for each response and sets the corresponding `Content-Type` header in HTTP responses. This enables browsers and clients to interpret content accurately,

```nginx

> include       /etc/nginx/mime.types;

Reviewer: This is not always at the same location and the configuration varies by system. We should instead use a fixed set of mimes of interest, we only actually care about wasm and js for compression

```

Additionally, we specify the default MIME type for unspecified files as `application/octet-stream`. We do this to indicate that a file is binary data, instructing the server and client to treat the file as raw bytes instead of interpreting it as text or any other format.

```nginx
default_type  application/octet-stream;
```

> We also enable compression for .wasm, .js, and .txt files, primarily used for the runtime chunks, within our server block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also enable compression for `.wasm`, `.js`, and `.txt` files, primarily used for the runtime chunks, within our server block.
```

```nginx
	gzip on;

> 	gzip_types      application/javascript application/wasm text/plain;

Reviewer: txt is not required. It does not hurt but it feels like it introduces more confusion than value.

.txt _used_ to be relevant in the CJ2 era

```

To ensure NGINX generates relative redirects, we disable the absolute redirect option within our location block.

```nginx
absolute_redirect off;
```

In our location block, we define specific `Cross-Origin` headers to enable secure embedding and resource access for CheerpJ.

```nginx
add_header 'Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy' 'same-origin' always;
add_header 'Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy' 'require-corp' always;
add_header 'Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy' 'credentialless' always;
```

### Get rid of 404 not found messages

To get rid of `404 not found` browser console messages when self hosting a runtime build of CheerpJ, you can use the `try_files` option with NGINX.

```nginx {4}
	location / {
		root /home/path/to/cheerpj;
		autoindex on;
		try_files $uri $uri/ =204;
	}
```

> With the `try_files` directive, NGINX will return a 204 status code for any files that are not found. This indicates that the request was processed successfully but no content is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the `try_files` directive, NGINX will return a `204` status code for any files that are not found. This indicates that the request was processed successfully but no content is returned.
```

### Hosting compressed JavaScript library files

> NGINX offers the capability to directly serve compressed gzip files using the `gzip_static on;` directive.

Reviewer: Simplify/remove following previous discussion

> When this option is enabled, NGINX will deliver pre-compressed gzip files if available on the server, avoiding the need to compress them dynamically for each request. Keep in mind that this option only works effectively when both a `.js` and a `.js.gz` file are present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When this option is enabled, NGINX will deliver pre-compressed gzip files if available on the server, avoiding the need to compress them dynamically for each request. Keep in mind that this option only works effectively when both a `.js` and a `.js.gz` files are present.
```
